Can you hear me well? Okay, my name is Flávia. I'm a data scientist in Mendelix, which is a company that does
diagnosis of genetics diseases based in Sao Paulo, Brazil
and I'm here today to talk to you about how I have used tidymodels to validate a
PRS of breast cancer in Brazil
So
Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer for women in
85% of all countries as you can see in this map
Represented in pink. You can see that both Brazil and the US are among them
The main risk factors for breast cancer are sex, age,
Lifestyle factors such as alcohol consumption and sedentarism
hormonal factors such as contraceptive pill usage
family history and
genetics
The genetics of breast cancer became widely known after
Angelina Jolie revealed that she carried a BRCA1 mutation and
Decided to undergo a preventive double mastectomy
BRCA1 is an example of a gene in which mutations can dramatically increase the risk of breast cancer up to about
80% over a woman's lifetime. That's roughly six times the general population risk
Besides high-risk mutations such as in the BRCA1 gene
there are also moderate risk mutations, which increase the risk by about two to threefold and
They both occur in single genes
Apart from them there are also other
Mutations which we'll call genetic variants that have very small effects individually that but that can be
Added together in what in what composes
Polygenic risk score or PRS. These variants are spread all over our genome
So the polygenic risk score follows a normal distribution in which
the majority of us will have an intermediate score, which is
The same risk as the general population
but some of us will have a high score due to having a lot of this small effect variants and
We'll have an increased risk for breast cancer due to the polygenic risk score
This variants with small effects are discovered through very large studies with hundreds of thousands to millions of people
These studies are called genome-wide association studies or GWAS
They are generally conducted with individuals of a single genetic ancestry
Because it facilitates the discovery of this variants
The majority of this study so far as you can see in this plot
90% of them have been conducted with individuals of European ancestry and the big problem about that is that
Not all PRS is discovered in European populations can be generalized to other ancestries
because especially the there are differences in
frequency and effect of variants among ancestries
Brazil has one of the most diverse populations in the world
75% of our individuals have more have at least two
Continental ancestries and these are mainly European African
Native American and East Asian and
Since building our own PRS from scratch was not in the radar
We decided to test if some European based PRS European developed PRS could be applied to our population
So
Once I gathered all my data all my cases and controls data it was already I decided to I
started to have a lot of questions and uncertainties and
The feeling reminded me of a very specific situation that I've been through in the spring of
2017 when I moved to New York, let me tell you a story about it
So during my PhD
I got a scholarship to spend one year in the Weill Cornell Medicine Lab to do a part of my project there. I
was very excited it was my first time in New York and
once I got there and settled in the into the apartment with my roommates, I
Noticed that I needed to buy some things like laundry detergent
shampoo and yogurt
So I made a list with 20 items and went to the grocery store
When I got there and went and got into the fridge part to buy my yogurt I
Simply got stuck
There were so many options that I could not decide which one to pick
The cheapest maybe Oh the list of ingredients is too extense. I don't know. What about the most expensive one?
It must be good
Too expensive. I don't know if it's worth it
Which brand is this? Should I buy Greek or regular yogurt? What is skr?
as this
So, oh my god, I need some help. So that day I understood the meaning of the word
Overwhelmed I was so overwhelmed that I that I left the grocery store
With only half of my list checked off and a headache
So as many of you here are from the u.s
I believe you might have never experienced the feeling of overwhelm by going to the grocery store
But I'm sure you have experienced this from doing a data science project, right?
You have to pick so many things and it was not different for me in my PRS project
So I had to pick first
Where should I get the PRS is to test should I
Get them from papers from PRS database from a geowas database
What about the method to analyze should I trust the nature or science paper?
should I use metric X or Y statistic K or Z and
Operationally, what about the ID? Should I stick with the one I know or try that newest fastest available?
Should I try the new tool they've shared in positive conf or stick with the ones I don't know
So as this and many more questions were going through my head. I
was
Overwhelmed in my project
But once I've passed it all and got into the final part of my project what I needed to answer the question
Can European based PRS be used in Brazil to identify a high breast cancer risk?
I
Knew that tidy models was my the solution. It was not be overwhelmed overwhelming at all
let me
Show you a little bit about it. So tidy models is a set of tools developed from posit engineers to
Do all operations related to machine learning from pre-processing to modeling and results gathering
It has
Integratable tools meaning that each to talk with the other with each other each of their tools
The multi package tools talk with each other in a pipe of a way
It is compatible with the tidyverse so you can use your favorite packages such as dplyr
ggplot2 tidy R and so on
And it has what I call a concept of reusable building blocks where each tool is a part of the process
it were and it works like
musical orchestra where each tool is an instrument and if you want to change your
Symphony or the result of your models you can change like a chord of an instrument
Let me show you better in a practical way of all of my step-by-step
So
First I want to show you a glance of my data
I've read it with read R and here you can see I have ID
Status sex the PRS is and the principal components 1 through 10 all row
Then I started with my first tidy models tool, which is our sample to split my data easily into training and testing here
I've used
Status as the strata because I wanted to balance cases and controls
Then prior to the next step I normalize the PRS values by mean and standard deviation of
Controls only because I didn't want it to bias by the selected patients
Then with recipes I could easily set a formula for my model here I'm setting status as the
as the variable
Then with stepper em, I could remove all of the predictors I did not want to use and
I could easily Center and scale my
principal components with step normalize
Then I've set my model with barn snip
It's a simple logistic regression
I
Started with logistic rag function
Then I set my engine as the GLM function and the mode
Classification because I wanted to classify individuals into having the disease or not
Then workflows served as the orchestra conductor where it joined it joined
recipes and the recipe and the engine and
It could be easily piped to a fit function and fit my data to get the results
I
Could extract the statistics with the versatile tidy function from the broom package here
I said exponentiate to true to get the odds ratio and I use some Bayes
Deployer functions to get only the PRS
Results. That's what I was interested in
Then I did a new recipe
With without the principal components to get the AUC metric for only PRS
And I could easily update with the recipe with update recipe from workflows
Then I predicted the data and extracted the AUC metric with a yardstick rock AUC function
So, that's it this was my was my workflow very easy all tools integrated
No need to shape and reshape the data
all
Simple no overwhelm at all
So to get my final results, I just repeated that with all the other PRS's. I
Split my data into PRS deciles in order to evaluate if higher PRS values would have
would identify a higher risk for the disease and
Due to the heterogeneity of our ancestry sample
I've split it into different groups to evaluate PRS for all
Particularities of ancestries I'm going to show you better
So this is the first main result we had you can see that there is a positive correlation of
the odds ratio on the y-axis and the PRS deciles on the x-axis and
this is an indication that a higher values of PRS can predict better the disease and
This shows us that the three PRS's here generalized well to our population
Then I did the split by ancestry composition
The first group was an East Asian majority with over 50% of East Asian ancestry
the second group non-european majority with less than 50% of European ancestry and
The third group European majority with 50% or more of European ancestry
The overall results were good. We're very similar to the overall population with odds ratios. These are odds ratios per standard deviation
but
particularly for the East Asian group one of the PRS's
The broad PRS exhibited a wide confidence interval which included a less than one value of odds ratio
and a p-value higher than our threshold so we could not follow with it as a
Valid PRS for our population. So we validated both 380 and 313 PRS's
by the way, their names are the number of variants they have and
With 380 exhibiting the best results
Remember the moderate risk variants
So in this plot we compare some genes that are very important for a breast cancer risk and we could show that
the top PRS decile compare has has an odds ratio that's comparable to
ATM and check two which are genes in which
Moderate risk variants reside. So this result is very important because it not only shows that it is
generalizable to our population, but also that it
Is it has clinical use
the PRS by the way
So earlier this year, we published a paper with those results
And we also developed a genetic test in Mendelix
which includes the top 100 most important genes for hereditary cancer in general and the breast cancer PRS in which
if a woman has a
PRS value that is on the top decile the report shows that they have a moderate risk for breast cancer
So the key takeaways of my talk are that projects and data science are inherently overwhelming
We have so many things to pick so many data formats
It's like going to the grocery store in a foreign country
But if you have a machine learning part in your project
I recommend you to use tiny models because it is very well organized
All steps are covered. And of course the tools I've shown here. It's not everything they have to have much more
so so
It worked fluidly. It was not an overwhelming part of my project and
It enabled the PRS validation in Brazil, which is a step forward to
make precision medicine more
Available to more people and more ancestries and I'm sure other
Ancestries also do not have this access and they can now do the same analysis I did
So
Thank you very much for your attention if you want to find more find out more about the breast cancer PRS
Validation project you can point yourself on to this QR code
Which will lead you to a github repository with the code slides and the link to the paper
Thank you very much
You
Excellent let's log any questions on Slido
While we wait I should tell you that
the original name of the workflow package was orchestra really so I texted Davis that and
He he thinks it's a great analogy
Yeah, so
One question, do you have any like pain points in the analysis process? Was there anything that was like exceedingly difficult or well, actually
the whole bioinformatics part the
principal components analysis I had to
Do everything kind of from scratch because I was using axon data and there was no
process of doing this I had to
Use an external database
It was the most complicated part so not so data science related more bioinformatics related
Okay. Okay. All right. Thank you very much. Let's I think a one more time
You